RGB-HEX Converter
In this project, we'll use Bitwise operators to build a calculator that can convert RGB values to Hexadecimal (hex) values, and vice-versa.

We'll add three methods to the project:

A method to convert RGB to Hex
A method to convert Hex to RGB
A method that starts the prompt cycle
The program should do the following:

Prompt the user for the type of conversion they want
Ask the user to input the RGB or Hex value
Use Bitwise operators and shifting in order to convert the value
Print the converted value to the user
It's useful to know some background on RGB and hex values, so we recommend reading the resources we linked to.

Note: As with professional software development, you should be saving your code very often. As you code, make sure you click the "Save" button below to save your code/changes. Otherwise, you run the risk of losing all your code.

Let's begin!

1.
First, we'll create the RGB to Hex method.

On line 1, add a method called rgb_hex().

2.
We should expect users to make accidental errors as they input RGB values. Let's create a constant error message that will store the message we will display to users when they make an accidental error.

Inside the method, create a variable called invalid_msg and set it equal to an appropriate error message. The message should say something about invalid values being entered.

3.
To convert RGB values, we'll have to prompt the user to enter values for red (R), green (G), and blue (B). Let's start by asking them enter a value for red.

On the next line, still inside of the method, prompt the user to enter a red value using raw_input. Wrap their input usingint(). Finally, set the result equal to a variable called red.

4.
We know that an RGB value contains three separate values, with each value representing an amount of red (R), green (G), and blue (B). Acceptable values are within the range of 0 to 255. Let's add error checking to make sure acceptable values are entered.

On the next line, add an if statement that checks if the value of red is less than 0, or greater than 255.

5.
Inside of the if statement, we should inform the user that an invalid value has been entered.

Inside of the statement, print the error message that you created earlier. Then, on the next line, return.

6.
Now, just as in Step 3, prompt the user to enter a value for green (G). Wrap the input using int() and set the result equal to a variable called green.


7.
Next, add error checking to make sure that the value the user enters for the color green is valid. Inside of the if statement, print the error message and then return on the next line.


8.
We'll have to follow the same process to prompt the user to enter a value for the color blue (B).

Prompt the user, wrap their input with int(), and set it equal to a variable called blue.


9.
Again, add error checking make sure the value entered for the color blue is valid. Inside of the if statement, print the error message and then return.


10.
Now it's time to use Bitwise operators to build the rest of our method. We recommend becoming more familiar with hexadecimal numbers first so that you can understand what the Bitwise operators in the method do.

11.
On the next line, outside of any if statement, create a variable called val. Set it equal to the sum of shifting red to left by 16 bits, shifting green to left by 8 bits, and blue.





12.
Finally, call the hex() method and pass value in as the argument. Use list slicing to print out everything except the first two characters of that string. Also, call the upper() method on the result.

See if you can use string formatting to complete all of this in one line of code.

Click here to learn more about how hex() works.

13.
Great! This method will convert an RGB value to a hex value.

Now, add a method called hex_rgb(). This is the method we'll use to convert the opposite way (from Hex to RGB).


14.
Inside of the method, prompt the user to enter a hexadecimal value using raw_input(). Set the result equal to a variable called hex_val.

15.
Let's add some error checking that will make sure the user inputs a valid hexadecimal value. Valid hexadecimal values are six characters long, so let's check for that first.

Add an if statement that checks if the length of hex_val is not equal to six.

16.
Inside of the if statement, print a message to the user indicating that an invalid value was entered. On the next line, return.

17.
Otherwise, we should accept the hex value as an integer.

Add a corresponding else block that sets hex_val equal to calling int() with the arguments hex_val and 16.


18.
Next, outside of the else block, but still within the method, create a variable called two_hex_digits and set it equal to 2 raised to the power of 8.

19.
Next, we'll start calculating the RGB values.

Create a variable called blue and set it equal to hex_val modulo two_hex_digits.


20.
Next, shift hex_val to the right by 8 bits.


21.
Now, just as you did in Step 19, create a variable called green and set it equal to hex_val modulo two_hex_digits.


22.
On the next line, shift hex_val once more to the right by 8 bits.


23.
Finally, calculate the red value by creating a variable called red and setting it equal to hex_val modulo two_hex_digits.


24.
Let's write the last line of code for this method.

On the next line, use string formatting to print out the RGB values on one line. There should be no space between the individual values.

25.
Fantastic! The method you just wrote will convert a hexadecimal value to an RGB value.

Let's add the last method that will run our program. Create a new method called convert().


26.
Inside the method, add a while loop with the Boolean True as the condition.

27.
On the next line, inside of the while loop, prompt the user for input with the following message: Enter 1 to convert RGB to HEX. Enter 2 to convert HEX to RGB. Enter X to Exit:.

Set the result equal to a variable called option.

28.
Now let's handle all the cases of user input.

Start an if statement that checks if option is equal to '1' (as a string).

29.
Inside of the if statement, print the message RGB to Hex... to the user.

On the following line, call the rgb_hex() method.

30.
Add a corresponding elif block that checks if the option is '2'. If it is, print Hex to RGB... first. Then, on the next line, call the hex_rgb() method.


31.
Add another elif statement that checks if the option is 'X' or 'x'. If it is, exit the loop with the break keyword.

32.
Finally, finish the if statement by adding an else block. This part of the statement will handle any other input from the user. Inside of the else block, print Error..

33.
You're nearly done - great job! The next step is to actually call the method that will run our program.

As the final line of your code (outside of any method), call the convert() method.


34.
Great! Let's test out the converter.

In the terminal, type the following and hit "Enter" on your keyboard:

python rgb2hex.py
Feel free to expand the functionality. Happy coding!

35.
Click here for a video walkthrough from our experts to help you check your work!

